Was that at A&M or some other institution? Another
institution. I turned it down because I wanted to
be with Dr. Francis Moore. And then I had another
job offered in 31 that I turned down. I went to that
place and investigated. Where was that?
Research, where the Agricultural Experiment
Station had a subdivision.
And I turned it down. But Dr. Francis was perturbed
and went over to the president's office trying to
get a raise. And I wrote him a note. I said, I'm not
asking for a raise for this. I'm just telling you
that I'm satisfied here, and I'm going to stay. But
he gave me a raise, and he didn't wharten.
And it bothered him. Later on he found out that
Wharton wasn't getting that raise. I don't know
who called his attention to him, if it was Wharton
or somebody else. But he said that we came here on
the same basis and should be on the same basis.
That's a Wharton seven? No, Dr. Francis. Oh, but
I'm a little confused now. Wharton did not get a
raise. No, he did not. And you did? Yes.
But I don't know
just exactly why that came about in 35. If I did,
I've forgotten. Don't you think Dr. Francis had
something to do with it? Well, he had to approve it.
He was dean. And
I don't know whether Dr. Marsteller had anything
to do with it. I can't answer that. I don't know
what... I know this, that I didn't know the...
The ramifications on the responsibilities of
head of a department, apparently, because Dean
Bolton called me, asked me, told me that I was
supposed to attend academic council meetings,
but no one had ever told me about it. And I missed one
or two before I started going.
But that's a long time ago, I don't recall it. Oh,
except this, that in 36, I had been going to summer
school in,
I think I went in 29. I spent a summer away from here
at the University of Chicago taking special
courses in physiology and biochemistry.
And then in 34,
I was employed by the city of Dallas on meat
inspection for the summer.
And one summer I helped Dr. Francis turned a course
over to me to teach. He was supposed to teach it in
the summer. I taught it in his place. That was in
1933, I believe. I think it was in the Depression,
either 1932 or 1933. In 1934 I worked for the city of
Dallas.
Dr.
Francis died on June 28, 1936, and I was in Austin at
the University of Texas taking two courses, one in
physics and one in pharmacy.
And
Ed's department was supposed to be on a
twelve-month basis, and I'd been out on a
nine-month basis up until then. But I knew my
yearly salary, and they paid to me in the nine
months. I didn't apply for a leave of absence. I
spoke to Dr. Francis. He said, sure, it would. And
that was enough as far as he was concerned. And so at
his funeral, Dr. Marsteller told me, he says, Do
you know you're supposed to be on 12 months basis? I
said, they paid me a nine, Dr. Marcell. He said,
well, you're supposed to. Evidently, the fiscal
office had called his attention to it, that I was
supposed to be on 12 months. And no one told you
that? No. It was an error on the fiscal department.
They, of course, never made a mistake, but they did
that one time. So they dropped it. They said, drop
it. Forget about it. So after then, I applied for
leave of absence. But in other words, they wanted
you to stay the extra three months in the summer,
but keep you at the same nine-month salary. Heads
departments were supposed to be on 12 months duty.
That's right. I don't recall my salary. I don't
know whether I got a raise that year or not, I don't
recall. Maybe I did. They paid me nine months, nine
equal installments.
Nothing more was said about it.
I don't believe we could get by the fiscal
department nowadays with that. Back in 1935 when
you took over that department, do you recall what
what your aims were, what you thought you should do
with that department?
I don't recall now if I did. Life went on about as
usual, but
I think I started probably with the idea of
reorganizing courses.
When 37, when Dr. Marsteller, or fall of 36, I don't
know when he asked me then, or in 37, whether I
wanted to change anything. I had
several, I'll say, several changes. During what
those changes were? Well, increasing the hours
and changing the hours on some courses, yes. We
went from a four hour laboratory in toxicology, as
I recall. Back in those days you had two hour
laboratories or four hour laboratories. I asked
for a three hour laboratory. They wouldn't give it
to me.
Joe Howell was— Why did you want a three hour
laboratory? Because four was too long and two was
too short. I see. The material we had to teach in
that particular course It was just a waste of time,
to me, that fourth hour, because four hours is
entirely too long for a laboratory period, the way
we are teaching it. So Joe Howell says, no, he says,
you'll run our block system on scheduling. And Joe
Howell did all the scheduling. He was a wizard at
constructing schedules. But I can see in one part
in his favor that you had a two or four hour lab. And
if you put a three hours, you lose. You waste that
hour you can't schedule. So if you have a one, four
hour lab per week, you've got one hour there that
you can't block off another course. So I said,
well, Joe, If I had previously talked with Dr.
Eads, who came into the department in the fall of
36, following his graduation in 36, in June 36, or
May, I said, George Eads and I had discussed that if
you wouldn't let us have it in the regular one to
five, it would go to six o'clock. I said, well, Joe,
would it, be all right if we went from three to six?"
He says, yeah, if you want to do that. So we've had
three hour labs ever since. And there are many
three hour laboratories now. But I think that's
true of other institutions. But that's one change
I recall that it looked like we were going to have a
lot of difficulty with. We didn't, and then we
changed the hours on some courses and decreased it
on some and increased it on others. I recall that.
How about new faculty members? Well, we added Eads
that fall. How many did you start out with in that
department when you were chairman? One. That's
you. That's right. When I came here in 26, there
were four departments. and six staff members for
the entire School of Veterinary Medicine.
But EADS came in and then we added a third member I
guess in 38 or 39, I don't recall, Herbert Ott. And
then Ott went to the
wanted to go into service, and he spent most of the
war at Billy Bidd prison camp. But he's in
practicing California now, fortunately. He got
out of it. He had charge of all the
buffalo and things like that for all the meat
supply for that, in that prison camp.
But,
And then Henry Kozyski, he changed his name to
Keane, I believe. He was Polish. And why he changed
his name is beyond me. I don't think anyone ever
knew why, unless it was his wife. He married a girl
from Bremont, I believe, or Waco, somewhere up
there. When did he come? He came in...
probably 40, and stayed for a couple of years, and
then he wanted to go in service. So he is your third
department member. Yes. And then he went to China
and spent, went in the service, and quite a bit of it
was in China. Gee, yes. And he had quite an
experience, too. He came back, and we tried to get
him back, and he was a good man. He was from
Michigan. But he decided he wanted to get into
public health work. And so I think he went down to
Panama. I forget what, some tropical area. But
then, I don't know, it was
gradually added here and there. How many faculty
members did you have when you retired in your
department? I'd say eight or ten, something like
that. Eight or nine.
So you went from one to eight or nine in thirty-one
years. I'm not past the exact number, but oh
goodness, you must have twenty or more now.
So that's one of the changes that you witnessed,
this great expansion in your department. Yes, and
then the method of teaching. As students
increased
the classes, we had to modify the method of
teaching. Okay, tell me about that. What
specifically, in your book you talk about
electronic equipment. Yes. What kind of
electronic equipment? Dr. Reeds and I were both
interested in
presenting things or amplifying sounds of the
heart and peristalsis and the gastrointestinal
tract. So we wanted a very superior instrument to
do that with. And someone had come out with a Mako,
M-A-I-C-O, heartbeat pickup specifically for
the heart and frequency and the sounds. And it
turned out to be a, it was put out by sound. And we
got, we were not responsible for picking that
company solely. We got literature from,
corresponding with other veterinary colleges,
particular at Cornell about the type of
instruments. And I had gone to a workshop a couple
of weeks up in Ithaca at Cornell University, got
some pointers there, and we had already gotten
into some of this other work before we went up
there. But we got into it more after going up there,
I think of their schools, Cornell was one of the
leaders, and Minnesota was another one, but they
got into the electronic method.
So we contacted Dutch Dillingham, who was a
professor in electrical engineering, a graduate
here of 1922, and a friend of mine.
Dutch went over the material, and he picked out the
sound incorporated instrument. And it turned out
to be very delicate and was very suitable. In fact,
I liked it much better than one had at Cornell.
But we used Dutch as a kind of a consultant on
material, and
it paid off. We'd never order anything without his
approval. We wanted
a sound recorder. He said, now listen, what kind of
money do you have? He said, we played around with
some of these cheap instruments. He had charge of
the radio. He said, we finally had to put a, he says,
don't touch it. unless you have $1,000 to spend.
$1,000 back in those days was pretty big money. You
could buy a sound recorder for $150, $200. Maybe
somehow it was
cheaper than that, I don't know. But he says, don't
fool with them. He says, we tried several up there
in that radio, and said we finally had to get a good
sound recorder, to get a good tape. We had to
spend... I've forgotten, but he said it was over a
thousand dollars, well over a thousand dollars.
He said, don't touch them unless you've got that
much money. But we didn't have it. So we
sidetracked that for a while, but oh, it made our
class much more interesting
for swallowing. Even with the swallowing air,
what we some, we thought of doing this, that since
you could hear those, the gurgling sounds of that
air going into the cardiac portion of the stomach,
and, or drinking water, you could hear it splash
down here. And you could magnify, amplify that
thing, the whole class could hear almost every
bubble. Very interesting. Very interesting, and
so... I don't know whether the students
suggested, let him drink a Coke. Of course, well,
they'd carbonate it, and I tell you, it sounded
like a boiler factory. Oh, you could amplify that
thing. They'd blast it. And so you could get the
students' attention much more, and we'd let
students use them. We had two of them. And once in a
while, if they'd get damp, we'd have to send them
in. And one thing about it, we learned that rubber
diaphragm around it, so as if we put it down on a
heart or something or on blood or anything fluid.
We dare not get that thing damp. And like our
amplifiers, Dutch told us, says, don't you ever
get that damp. And the water spilled on it, says,
it'll Well, the boys wanted those things for
amplification on these dancers, and some of them
had dancers, see, in the A&M
student chapter of the AVMA. I let them have it. And
one of them was off a little bit. I think somebody
spilled a Coke or something on the thing, and so I
couldn't let them have it. And because of that, I
was worn. It was my era. But there was more and more
demand. And then other than that, somebody else
wanted to borrow it. Well, so we'll keep it here and
keep it covered up to keep the air, keeping it from
getting damp and then have it work. But you've got
to really. warp sound of that thing, the horn.
Those things were about that high and that wide,
the two amplifiers we used. But they were
excellent. Were there any other electronic
gadgetry that you used? Oh, then we went to the
Baylor University School of Medicine, the
Physiology Department specifically. The head of
the department came from Yale and He really went
into electronics, and a private company was
organized for putting those materials out. They
called it the physiograph. First thing you know,
in summer they were putting on courses in
electronic reproduction and physiology, and
people from all over the United States. from the
veterinary school. I think they have a veterinary
college in the United States. One of the young
instructors or something down there and took it
back home and the whole veterinary education was
changed and the physiology. So now they have the
department and Davis and the department and
McCready who's head now. had some ideas, and Mac
Murray, they took that course. Price went down
when he resigned the deanship, why he went down to
take that course at Baylor. But
I told him, I said, okay, you youngsters go after
it. I said, I'm too old to fool with some of that
stuff. I'm going to stay with some of this old
material. And I said, I still believe I can do some
things that you all can't do with it.
sophisticated material. And of course it racked
my mind to think up something and racked their mind
to refute my statement. There's one thing that I
know of that they can't do with that. And I said,
well, you're putting the students here and you're
putting that material out. It's a demonstration.
I said, I like the students to go in and get their
hands dirty and get them in, let them do a lot of the
work. That was my idea of teaching. But it came to
much of a demonstration, but now the students go,
we have, they have the students, you can take up as
many as six or seven in a group, and they've got
little cubby holes, you know, where they work, and
have that material, and they work by groups. But
all of them were wired together, and then those are
hooked up to the demonstration room, the lecture
room, and even out to the large animal. You can take
the horse, for example, instead of the horse, he's
out in the building in the back. And also with the TV
station, they hook up, and it was just a closed
circuit TV. got hooked up to the clinic and hooked
up to the autopsy room. And the entire, every
department involved, physiology, I know, and
clinic. When did this come back, about all this
closed circuit? Well, they were doing it by the
time I retired. It started beforehand. We had gone
physiographs. We had physiographs stacked
around like cordwood. And we were going to that
entirely. In the meantime, I remember going up to
St. Paul in Minneapolis. The veterinary school is
at St. Paul, the medical school in Minneapolis.
And I remember going up there, and they in the
veterinary and the physiology department, they
were still using the old man, a chymograph. And
they were doing a good job, but they felt that on
graduate work, they'd let them do that. But we were
the first ones that let the students get into it and
prepared that lab. And I was putting our heads
together to try to get that thing worked up
architecturally to fit them. And it is to fit the
students. And a lot of that was accomplished
after, or it was in the process of being done when I
retired. But that whole I think we started on
electronics in 36, 37 I think, mostly 37, 38,
somewhere along there. We got interested in it. In
your department, was there a tendency toward more
specialization over the years? Yes, I used to
think that we'd rotate. instructors in
physiology and pharmacology. In fact, Dr.
Schmidt has that in his statement. He asked, who
taught this, who taught that? I said, Dr. Schmidt,
my idea was rotating these men. I said, if they go on
and get promoted or go to some other school, they
will have had experience in these others. From my
viewpoint, but now from old from, Eads was more
interested in pharmacology, I turned it over to
him, gladly. It's hard to teach. And I'd take
toxicology, and then one of the others would take
physiology, Kazuski, and Farat, and then
Kazuski. And Eads and I both worked on physiology.
I still kept my hands in on physiology, what the
others I more or less took what the others left. And
I'd give them a choice of what they wanted to go
into. And because I think, first of all, they
should be kept happy. And I figured they'd stay
there longer if they were happy and teaching what
they wanted. And if they wanted to rotate, it was
all right. But since then, it's become more and
more From year to year, it became more and more
specialized. Why do you think that is? I don't
know. I took some courses. The reason I wanted
toxicology, because I had gone to Iowa State and
had taken taxonomy,
plant classification, from probably the leading
taxonomist in the country, Dr. Pamel, L.H. Pamel.
and noted botanist. In fact, he was one of the first
ones to work on cotton root rot here in the
Experiment Station. He and Dr. Francis became
friends, and that was in the late 80s, early 90s.
And
he was on loan from the Shaw Botanical Gardens of
St. Louis to the college, In fact, he initiated
that work on cotton root rot. Then Dr. Taubenhaus
came in and took it over.
But then I had taken graduate work in poisonous
plants from Dr. Pamel, a spire problems course.
And he,
one of his daughters married a veterinarian who
was on the faculty at Gainesville, the University
of Florida. And
he had become interested in poisonous plants, and
so Dr. Pimel got to know practically every large
animal practitioner in the state of Florida. And
he collected piles of specimens. And he said, go
through and classify those plants. And he had just
collected them the summer before, the winter
before, see. He'd take his vacations in January or
February, and he'd go down there, and of course
that still would have lush growth down in Florida.
But, oh, hundreds of plants. And he says, classify
those. I learned some taxonomy. That's the way to
learn it. And I had my desk in his office. He had an
office probably as big as this living room. And so I
had a microscope and a little desk table in one
corner. He was head of—the botany department was
on the fourth floor of Central Hall at Iowa State.
He had a heart condition, and he couldn't walk
those steps. He took me up there one day, and I said,
Doc, he wants to show me something. I don't recall
now, and he says, no, I can make it. We'll just have
to stop and rest. During and until we get to the top
of each step, each level, we'd stop and rest a
little. But I was sure afraid of him. But he,
every day, That is the five days or six days a week. I
think we were inside, outside the classes. His
desk would come in, he had a pile of specimens would
be sent in. He'd classify them. He'd look at them at
a glance and could tell what they were. And he'd
have the secretary dictate a letter to them. and
this plant is so-and-so, and so-and-so, and give
something about the history of it, referring to
the notes. And it amazed me. And up until that time,
of course, I was animal-minded. And I could see
these, of course, in summer of 27. That was before
the Depression. All the barns and the houses were
well painted. And some of those farms were just
garden spots. I'd take him out on Saturdays. He
wouldn't drive. He didn't drive. And he might get a
letter. It might be 50 or 60 miles from Ames, and
we'd go out there. I'd take him out there in my car.
And I got to seeing these hogs and these dairy
cattle and these beef animals and these horses.